Before we dive into focusing on vulnerability scanning and penetration testing,
it's important to understand the overall vulnerability management process.
It typically includes these eight phases.
The first three are what contributes to finding gaps and
includes scoping, identifying, and scanning.
The first is to set the scope,
so this is where you determine conceptually what you want to test.
For example, you can target a certain datacenter looking for a specific set of issues,
a specific application or other reasons.
Next is identify.
Here, you pinpoint the specific host network application or other resource targets.
At this point, you may identify specific IP addresses or URLs that you're targeting.
The third step in finding gaps is to scan.
You can figure and run the scan or test against the identified target.
Here, you are using a variety of tools and methods such
as vulnerability scanning software to find the issues.
We'll cover the remaining steps in greater depth in a later lesson.
However, it's important to understand this overarching process up front.
There are many different ways to find vulnerabilities.
Two key categories are vulnerability scanning and penetration testing.
On the vulnerability scanning side,
host and network vulnerability scans are used to find security gaps on servers,
desktops, mobile devices, and more within a network.
There are also different modes of vulnerability scanning.
Active scanning uses real traffic and actions to identify vulnerabilities while
passive scanning listens on the network and
identifies issues in server and client software.
Application vulnerability scanning targets security
within AppCode and how the app operates.
There are also different modes for app scanning as well.
For example, dynamic application scans,
test functionality while the program is executing operations.
While static scanned on the other hand,
test application functionality and security without executing any code at all.
Now regardless of mode,
application vulnerability scans should be used to test new applications being developed,
as well as to check for security issues after
a major code update or for ongoing maintenance.
On the other end, penetration testing is
an additional level of actively aiming to essentially break your own security.
Penetration tests can target anything from networks and
hosts to people, to physical assets.
These types of tests should be conducted regularly as
a best practice and especially after any major changes to network configurations,
such as firewalls and routing changes.